CMSC724 Project Proposal

Compression in Hadoop

Samet Ayhan, Greg Benjamin, Kishan Sudusinghe

University of Maryland, College Park

March 5, 2012

Proposal

Today, we are surrounded by vast amounts of data. We upload/download pictures, videos, text friends
and family, leave comments around the web, and so forth. In addition to us, machines are generating
and storing large amounts of data. The exponential growth of data initially presented challenges to
technology business such as Google, Yahoo, Amazon, Microsoft, etc. They needed to go through this
large amount of data (in the range of petabytes and even more) to make sense out of it. During this
timeframe, Google was the first company that publicized MapReduce which allowed them to scale their
data processing needs. This system aroused a lot of interest due to fact that many similar companies
were facing the same challenges. [1]

MapReduce is a framework introduced by Google in 2004 to support distributed computing on large
data sets on geographically dispersed clusters of commodity hardware. Apache Hadoop is an open
source programming model for writing applications that processes vast amounts of data in parallel.
Hadoop was inspired by Google’s MapReduce and Google File System.

Within MapReduce programming model, users specify a map function that processes a key/value pair to
generate a set of intermediate key/value pairs, and a reduce function that merges all intermediate
values associated with the same intermediate key. Many real world tasks are expressible in this model.
Programs written in this functional style are automatically parallelized and executed on a large cluster of
commodity machines. The run-time system takes care of the details of partitioning the input data,
scheduling the program's execution across a set of machines, handling machine failures, and managing
the required inter-machine communication. This allows programmers without any experience with
parallel and distributed systems to easily utilize the resources of a large distributed system. [2]

Although MapReduce provides with tools and utilities to allow programmers to accomplish their parallel
computing needs of large amounts of data, performance has reportedly been a bottleneck. A 2010
paper by Michael Stonebraker et al. compared the performance of MapReduce with parallel databases
and concluded that Hadoop should enable column-storage techniques and operate directly on
compressed data. [3] In fact, many problems encountered by MapReduce users may be overcome by
applying techniques learned from over three decades of research on parallel DBMSs. However,
translating these techniques to a MapReduce implementation such as Hadoop presents unique
challenges that can lead to new design choices. [4]

Inspired by Floratoru et al., we propose to explore the area of column-oriented storage techniques for
MapReduce which will investigate implementation of compression techniques. The paper only
experiments with simple LZO compression, citing a belief that more advanced techniques which provide
higher compression ratios induce too much overhead and actually harm performance. We plan to test

this claim on a variety of compression techniques, in particular arithmetic coding, which we believe is
well-suited to this application.

We intend to begin with detailed literature survey, obtain source code from Floratoru et al., on their
implementation and verify the outcome, if we can, plug in additional compression techniques and
perform testing. We would welcome any input offered.

[1] Chuck Lam, 2011, Hadoop in Action, Manning

[2] Jeffrey Dean, Sanjay Ghemawat, 2004, Simplified Data Processing on Large Clusters

[3] Michael Stonebraker, Daniel Abadi, David J. Dewitt, Sam Madden, Erik Paulson, Andrew Pavlo, and
Alexander Rasin, 2010, MapReduce and Parallel DBMSs: Friends or Foes?

[4] Avrilia Floratou, Jignesh M. Patel, Eugene J. Shekita, Sandeep Tata, 2011, Column-oriented Storage
Techniques for MapReduce
